Organisations Working in Several Areas


Centre for Effective Altruism (CEA)
The Centre for Effective Altruism’s mission is to create a global community of people who have made helping others a core part of their lives, and who use evidence and scientific reasoning to figure out how to do so as effectively as possible. Their projects include:

EA Global conferences
EA Funds - philanthropic managed funds
Local EA group support
Effective Altruism Grants - which supports new projects
Giving What We Can - a community of people who have pledged to donate 10% of their income.
www.effectivealtruism.org - an introductory website that compiles key EA resources.



80,000 Hours (80K)
80,000 Hours aims to help people pursue high-impact careers. They do this by providing career advice for talented people who want to have a social impact. They provide relevant information in several ways, including:

Key ideas on career planning
Their research on careers with social impact
The 80,000 Hours Podcast, which features in-depth interviews about a variety of topics relevant to effective altruism and career decisions
A curated high-impact job board



Rethink Charity
Rethink Charity runs a variety of projects that aid the effective altruism community. These include:

RC Forward, a cause-neutral donation routing fund that makes high-impact charities tax-deductible in Canada
Rethink Priorities, dedicated to doing foundational research on neglected causes in a highly empirical and transparent manner
The EA Survey, which provides an annual snapshot of the effective altruism community
Co-organising EA Giving Tuesday
Hosting the EA Hub



Open Philanthropy Project (Open Phil)
The Open Philanthropy Project is a research and grant-making organisation aiming to share their findings openly and give effectively. They are mostly cause-neutral, but have been focused on four broad categories: U.S. policy, global catastrophic risks, scientific research, and global health & development. Open Phil receives most of its money from Dustin Moskovitz and Cari Tuna of Good Ventures, and is currently the largest funder of effective altruism projects.




Charity Evaluators
These organisations conduct research in order to recommend outstanding charities.



GiveWell
GiveWell is a nonprofit dedicated to finding outstanding giving opportunities in the field of global health & development. They publish their analysis and recommend a small number of high-impact giving opportunities. GiveWell also provides incubation grants for highly-promising new charities.




Animal Charity Evaluators (ACE, pronounced as one word “ace”)
ACE is dedicated to finding and promoting the most effective ways to help animals. They conduct research on how to help animals effectively and publish a list of their most highly recommended charities. ACE also funds research.




Founders Pledge
Founders Pledge produces research reports and recommends charities concerning a wide range of cause areas, including global health, cash transfers, climate change, mental health, animal welfare, evidence-based policy, women’s empowerment, forced displacement, and existential risks.




The Life You Can Save (TLYCS)
TLYCS promotes a list of charities whose interventions effectively improve life and health for those living in global extreme poverty.




Other Research
Range of Cause Areas


Open Philanthropy Project (‘Open Phil’)
The Open Philanthropy Project is a grant making organisation aiming to give effectively and share their findings openly. They are mostly cause-neutral, but have been focused on four broad categories: U.S. policy, global catastrophic risks, scientific research, and global health & development. Open Phil receives most of its money from Dustin Moskovitz and Cari Tuna of Good Ventures, and is currently the largest funder of effective altruism projects.




Rethink Priorities
Rethink Priorities, a project of Rethink Charity, is dedicated to doing foundational research on several neglected causes in an empirical and transparent manner. Their research includes work on animal welfare, global health, long-term future and the EA movement. Rethink Priorities has also created PriorityWiki, a cause prioritisation wiki anyone can edit.




Charity Entrepreneurship
Charity Entrepreneurship is a research and training program aimed at creating multiple high impact charities annually. They run an incubation program, and research promising ideas for new impactful charities. Charity Entrepreneurship is a project of Charity Science.



Global Priorities and Existential Risk


Centre for the Study of Existential Risk (CSER, pronounced see-ser)
CSER is an interdisciplinary research centre dedicated to the study and mitigation of risks that could lead to human extinction or civilisational collapse. Their research topics include biological, environmental, and technological risks.





Global Priorities Institute (GPI)
GPI’s mission is to conduct and promote foundational academic research on how to do good most effectively. Their research agenda investigates the longtermism paradigm and general issues in cause prioritisation.

GPI is a part of the University of Oxford.





Future of Humanity Institute (FHI)
FHI aims to shed light on crucial considerations that might shape humanity’s long-term future. They currently divide their work into four focus areas: Macrostrategy, AI Safety, Center for the Governance of AI and Biotechnology. FHI houses the Center for the Governance of AI and is a part of the University of Oxford.





Future of Life Institute (FLI)
FLI supports research and initiatives for safeguarding life and developing optimistic visions of the future, including positive ways for humanity to steer its own course with the consideration of new technologies and challenges. In addition to their articles on AI, biotechnology, nuclear technology, and the climate, they produce two podcasts:

The FLI Podcast, which features conversations with prominent researchers, policy experts, philosophers, and other influential thinkers of all kinds
AI Alignment Podcast, a series exploring the AI alignment problem across a large variety of domains



Berkeley Existential Risk Initiative (BERI, pronounced like “berry”)
BERI’s goal is to support the “existential risk ecosystem” by providing a source of flexible funding and human capital for its most important and neglected projects.




Center on Long-Term Risk (CLR)
CLR conducts research on reducing risks of astronomical suffering (s-risks) They publish essays and academic articles, and advise individuals and policymakers. Their focus is on exploring strategies to avoid risks of dystopian futures and working toward a future guided by careful, ethical reflection.



Animals


Animal Charity Evaluators (ACE, pronounced as one word “ace”)
ACE is dedicated to finding and promoting the most effective ways to help animals. They conduct research on how to help animals effectively and publish a list of their most highly recommended charities. ACE also funds research.





Sentience Institute
Sentience Institute is a think tank dedicated to the expansion of humanity’s moral circle. They currently focus on strategies to expand the circle to farmed animals.





Animal Ethics
Animal Ethics was formed to promote discussion about issues in animal ethics and to provide resources for animal advocates. In addition, they perform outreach work aimed at achieving a shift in attitudes towards speciesism.





Wild Animal Initiative
Wild Animal Initiative’s mission is to research, raise awareness of, and reduce the suffering of animals. Wild Animal Initiative publishes research on wild animal welfare and works to build welfare biology as an academic field.





Animal Advocacy Careers
​Animal Advocacy Careers (AAC)seeks to address the career and talent bottlenecks in the animal advocacy movement, with an initial focus on the farmed animal movement.​

Animal Advocacy Careers focuses on providing resources, mentorship, and training programmes to those who are seeking a career related to effective animal altruism, and to those organizations that are already doing work in the area.



Global Health and Poverty


GiveWell
GiveWell is a nonprofit dedicated to finding outstanding giving opportunities in the field of global health & development. They publish their analysis and recommend a small number of high-impact giving opportunities. GiveWell also provides incubation grants for highly-promising new charities.





Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL pronounced “jay-pal”)
J-PAL is a global research center working to reduce poverty by ensuring that policy is informed by scientific evidence. They do this through research (including many randomised impact evaluations), policy outreach and training.





Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA)
IPA is a research and policy nonprofit that discovers and promotes effective solutions to global poverty problems. They create high-quality evidence, and then help turn that evidence into programs and policies.



AI Safety


Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI, pronounced “mirree”)
MIRI is a research nonprofit studying the mathematical underpinnings of intelligent behavior. Their mission is to develop formal tools for the clean design and analysis of general-purpose AI systems, with the intent of making such systems safer and more reliable when they are developed.





Center for Human-Compatible AI (CHAI, pronounced “chai” as in chai tea)
CHAI’s goal is to develop the conceptual and technical understanding to reorient AI research towards provably beneficial systems. CHAI’s research incorporates the social sciences in addition to technical AI research.




Membership Organisations


Local EA Groups
There are EA groups that you can join in many countries in the world.





Giving What We Can (GWWC)
Giving What We Can is a community of effective givers. They inspire people to donate significantly and as effectively as possible. The Giving What We Can Pledge involves committing to give at least 10% of their income to the organisations you think can do the most good with it. They also have a lower commitment option, called Try Giving.

GWWC is a part of the Centre for Effective Altruism.





Founders Pledge
Founders Pledge empowers entrepreneurs to do good. Pledgers commit to give a percentage of their future exit or liquidity event earnings to high-impact charities of their choice. Founders Pledge also produces research reports on and recommends charities for a wide range of cause areas, including global health, cash transfers, climate change, mental health, animal welfare, evidence-based policy, women’s empowerment, forced displacement, and existential risks.





The Life You Can Save (TLYCS)
The mission of TLYCS is to promote effective charities, and develop a culture of effective giving in affluent countries to improve the lives of those living in extreme poverty. The Life You Can Save pledge asks members to donate a percentage of their income to effective charities. The percentage depends on income.





One for the World (OFTW)
OFTW encourages people to donate at least 1% of their income to OFTW’s portfolio of effective charities. OFTW trains student leaders, organises educational events, and supports various marketing initiatives across campuses, mostly in the United States.




Rationality


Center for Applied Rationality (CFAR, pronounced see-far)
CFAR aims to improve our understanding of how human cognition works, in order to help people solve the problems that really matter. CFAR finds and creates cognitive tools, and delivers those tools to individuals - primarily through workshops.



LessWrong
LessWrong is a community blog devoted to rationality. They provide a place to read the content produced by the rationality community, which anyone can contribute to. ‘Rationality A:Z’ is often recommended as a long-form introduction to the formative ideas behind LessWrong.
